wireguard/02/README.md, before:

# Wireguard tunnel between R1 (VM1), WGS (VM2) and R2 (VM3)
[Wireguard](https://www.wireguard.com/) gained a lot of popularity and attention when [it was incorporated into the Linux Kernel in March 2020](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WireGuard). In this tutorial, we demonstrate the connection between two isolated VMs through the Wireguard tunnel. 

## Requirements
- [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads)
- [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads)
- [Wireguard](https://www.wireguard.com/install/)
- [RARE/freeRtr](http://www.freertr.org/)

## Overview
In this tutorial, we demonstrate the necessary configurations to establish a tunnel between routers R1 (VM1) and R2 (VM3) passing through the Wireguard Server (VM2).\
An important point that we must observe is the isolation between the virtual machines VM1 and VM3, which allows demonstrating the effectiveness of the tunnel.

## Topology
VM1 (NAT), VM2 (NAT/Bridge) and VM3 (NAT)
```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph VM1 ["VM1"]
        A((r1))
    end
    subgraph VM2 ["VM2"]
        B[wgs]
    end
    subgraph VM3 ["VM3"]
        C((r2))
    end
    VM1 ==>| NAT | VM2
    VM3 ==>| NAT | VM2
    A <==>| Wireguard Tunnel | B
    B <==>| Wireguard Tunnel | C
```

## Vagrant Configuration
This tutorial has been tested and run on [Ubuntu 22.04](http://www.releases.ubuntu.com/22.04/). All commands outside the context of VMs use this OS.\
Choose a directory to place the `Vagrantfille` files, such as `/home/$USER/experiment`, or any other location you want.\
Create the necessary directories for the experiment with the command:
```zsh
mkdir /home/$USER/experiment/{r1,r2,wgs}
```

### VM1 Vagrant config
Simplified version of VM1 Vagrantfile config `nano /home/$USER/experiment/r1/Vagrantfile`.
```zsh
# -*- mode: ruby -*-
# vi: set ft=ruby :

Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|
  # vagrant box
  config.vm.box = "debian/bullseye64"

  # sharing files between host and guest
  config.vm.synced_folder ".", "/home/vagrant/data"

  # https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/networking/forwarded_ports
  config.vm.usable_port_range = 8000..8999

  # Provider-specific configuration. These expose provider-specific options.
  config.vm.provider "virtualbox" do |vb|
 	# Customize the amount of memory on the VM:
 	vb.memory = "1024"
 	vb.cpus = 1
 	vb.name = "debian-bullseye64-vm1"
  end

 # Provisioning guest
  config.vm.provision "shell", inline: <<-SHELL
    apt-get update
    apt-get upgrade -y
    apt-get install -y default-jre-headless --no-install-recommends
    wget www.freertr.net/rtr.jar
    wget www.freertr.net/rtr-`uname -m`.tar -O rtr.tar
    mkdir /rtr
    mv rtr.* /rtr
    tar -xvf /rtr/rtr.tar -C /rtr
  SHELL
end
```

### VM2 Vagrant config
Similar to VM1 config `nano /home/$USER/experiment/wgs/Vagrantfile`, just changing guest provisioning only.

```zsh
...
config.vm.provision "shell", inline: <<-SHELL
     apt-get update
     apt-get upgrade -y        
     apt-get install -y wireguard
SHELL
...
```

### VM3 Vagrant config
Similar to VM1 config `nano /home/$USER/experiment/r2/Vagrantfile`. Just changing `vb.name` to `"debian-bullseye64-vm2"`.

## Wireguard Server Config (VM2)
Generate the public and private keys for `wgs`, `r1` and `r2`.
```zsh
umask 077 && wg genkey > wgs-private-key && wg pubkey < wgs-private-key > wgs-public-key
umask 077 && wg genkey > r1-private-key && wg pubkey < r1-private-key > r1-public-key
umask 077 && wg genkey > r2-private-key && wg pubkey < r2-private-key > r2-public-key
```

Edit the `wg0.conf` file with the command `sudo nano /etc/wireguard/wg0.conf`:
```zsh
[Interface]
Address = 10.10.10.10/24
ListenPort = 51820
PrivateKey = <debian-vm1-private-key>

[Peer]
PublicKey = <freertr-vm1-public-key>
AllowedIPs = 10.10.10.1/32

[Peer]
PublicKey = <freertr-vm2-public-key>
AllowedIPs = 10.10.10.2/32
```

## Routers configuration (freeRtr)

### R1 HW and SW configs (VM1)
Hardware configuration file `sudo nano /rtr/rtr-hw.txt`:
```zsh
int eth1 eth 0000.1111.0001 127.0.0.1 10001 127.0.0.1 65535
tcp2vrf 1123 v1 23
proc eth0 sudo /rtr/pcapInt.bin eth0 65535 127.0.0.1 10001 127.0.0.1
```
Software configuration file `sudo nano /rtr/rtr-sw.txt`:
```zsh
hostname r1
!
crypto ipsec ips1
 description <r1-private-key><wireguard-server-public-key>
 key GExWuXQ9RV4E+xeK/sXjk+DvBPJEAVbS5Z0KaWh2fV0=8i7QSghwslgQ3LCHg5pnEtkVgyd1KooDJK5F3xKYJTc=
 exit
!
prefix-list all4
 sequence 10 permit 0.0.0.0/0 ge 0 le 0
 exit
!
prefix-list all6
 sequence 10 permit ::/0 ge 0 le 0
 exit
!
vrf def v1
 exit
!
int eth1
 no desc
 vrf for v1
 ipv4 address dynamic dynamic
 ipv4 gateway-prefix all4
 ipv4 dhcp-client enable
 ipv4 dhcp-client early
 no shutdown
 no log-link-change
 exit
!
interface tunnel1
 description r2@eth1 -> wgs-ip-eth1@51820
 tunnel key 51820
 tunnel vrf v1
 tunnel protection ips1
 tunnel source eth0
 tunnel destination <wgs-ip-eth1>
 tunnel mode wireguard
 vrf forwarding v1
 ipv4 address 10.10.10.1 /24
 no shutdown
 no log-link-change
 exit
!
server telnet tel
 security protocol telnet
 exec timeout 10000000
 exec logging
 no exec authorization
 no login authentication
 login logging
 vrf v1
 exit
!
end
```

### R2 HW and SW configs (VM3)
Hardware configuration file `sudo nano /rtr/rtr-hw.txt`:
```zsh
int eth1 eth 0000.2222.0001 127.0.0.1 20001 127.0.0.1 65535
tcp2vrf 2223 v1 23
proc eth0 sudo /rtr/pcapInt.bin eth0 65535 127.0.0.1 20001 127.0.0.1
```
Software configuration file `sudo nano /rtr/rtr-sw.txt`:
```zsh
hostname r2
!
crypto ipsec ips1
 description <r1-private-key><wgs-public-key>
 key GExWuXQ9RV4E+xeK/sXjk+DvBPJEAVbS5Z0KaWh2fV0=8i7QSghwslgQ3LCHg5pnEtkVgyd1KooDJK5F3xKYJTc=
 exit
!
prefix-list all4
 sequence 10 permit 0.0.0.0/0 ge 0 le 0
 exit
!
prefix-list all6
 sequence 10 permit ::/0 ge 0 le 0
 exit
!
vrf def v1
 exit
!
int eth1
 no desc
 vrf for v1
 ipv4 address dynamic dynamic
 ipv4 gateway-prefix all4
 ipv4 dhcp-client enable
 ipv4 dhcp-client early
 no shutdown
 no log-link-change
 exit
!
interface tunnel1
 description r2@eth1 -> wgs-ip-eth1@51820
 tunnel key 51820
 tunnel vrf v1
 tunnel protection ips1
 tunnel source eth1
 tunnel destination <wgs-ip-eth1>
 tunnel mode wireguard
 vrf forwarding v1
 ipv4 address 10.10.10.2 /24
 no shutdown
 no log-link-change
 exit
!
server telnet tel
 security protocol telnet
 exec timeout 10000000
 exec logging
 no exec authorization
 no login authentication
 login logging
 vrf v1
 exit
!
end
```

### Start RARE/freeRtr
Edit `start.sh` file with the command `sudo nano /home/vagrant/start.sh`:
```zsh
#!/bin/sh
# This script start the RARE/freeRtr router
java -jar /rtr/rtr.jar routersc /rtr/rtr-hw.txt /rtr/rtr-sw.txt
```
Make it executable:
```zsh
sudo chmod +x start.sh
```

## References
- [Vagrant Documentation](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs)
- [Wireguard Documentation](https://www.wireguard.com/)
- [RARE/freeRtr Documentation](http://docs.freertr.org/)
- [Wireguard and RARE/freeRtr integration example](https://wiki.geant.org/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=270630994)

Commit message:

Update Create/Start the VMs section

wireguard/02/README.md, after:

# Wireguard tunnel between R1 (VM1), WGS (VM2) and R2 (VM3)
[Wireguard](https://www.wireguard.com/) gained a lot of popularity and attention when [it was incorporated into the Linux Kernel in March 2020](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WireGuard). In this tutorial, we demonstrate the connection between two isolated VMs through the Wireguard tunnel. 

## Requirements
- [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads)
- [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads)
- [Wireguard](https://www.wireguard.com/install/)
- [RARE/freeRtr](http://www.freertr.org/)

## Overview
In this tutorial, we demonstrate the necessary configurations to establish a tunnel between routers R1 (VM1) and R2 (VM3) passing through the Wireguard Server (VM2).\
An important point that we must observe is the isolation between the virtual machines VM1 and VM3, which allows demonstrating the effectiveness of the tunnel.

## Topology
VM1 (NAT), VM2 (NAT/Bridge) and VM3 (NAT)
```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph VM1 ["VM1"]
        A((r1))
    end
    subgraph VM2 ["VM2"]
        B[wgs]
    end
    subgraph VM3 ["VM3"]
        C((r2))
    end
    VM1 ==>| NAT | VM2
    VM3 ==>| NAT | VM2
    A <==>| Wireguard Tunnel | B
    B <==>| Wireguard Tunnel | C
```

## Vagrant Configuration
This tutorial has been tested and run on [Ubuntu 22.04](http://www.releases.ubuntu.com/22.04/). All commands outside the context of VMs use this OS.\
Choose a directory to place the `Vagrantfille` files, such as `/home/$USER/experiment`, or any other location you want.\
Create the necessary directories for the experiment with the command:
```zsh
mkdir /home/$USER/experiment/{r1,r2,wgs}
```

### VM1 Vagrant config
Simplified version of VM1 Vagrantfile config `nano /home/$USER/experiment/r1/Vagrantfile`.
```zsh
# -*- mode: ruby -*-
# vi: set ft=ruby :

Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|
  # vagrant box
  config.vm.box = "debian/bullseye64"

  # sharing files between host and guest
  config.vm.synced_folder ".", "/home/vagrant/data"

  # https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/networking/forwarded_ports
  config.vm.usable_port_range = 8000..8999

  # Provider-specific configuration. These expose provider-specific options.
  config.vm.provider "virtualbox" do |vb|
 	# Customize the amount of memory on the VM:
 	vb.memory = "1024"
 	vb.cpus = 1
 	vb.name = "debian-bullseye64-vm1"
  end

 # Provisioning guest
  config.vm.provision "shell", inline: <<-SHELL
    apt-get update
    apt-get upgrade -y
    apt-get install -y default-jre-headless --no-install-recommends
    wget www.freertr.net/rtr.jar
    wget www.freertr.net/rtr-`uname -m`.tar -O rtr.tar
    mkdir /rtr
    mv rtr.* /rtr
    tar -xvf /rtr/rtr.tar -C /rtr
  SHELL
end
```

### VM2 Vagrant config
Similar to VM1 config `nano /home/$USER/experiment/wgs/Vagrantfile`, just changing guest provisioning only.

```zsh
...
config.vm.provision "shell", inline: <<-SHELL
     apt-get update
     apt-get upgrade -y        
     apt-get install -y wireguard
SHELL
...
```

### VM3 Vagrant config
Similar to VM1 config `nano /home/$USER/experiment/r2/Vagrantfile`. Just changing `vb.name` to `"debian-bullseye64-vm2"`.

### Create/Start the VMs
Use the vagrant up command on directories:

- `cd /home/$USER/experiment/r1`
- `cd /home/$USER/experiment/wgs`
- `cd /home/$USER/experiment/r2`

This command will create the virtual machines VM1, VM2 and VM3 and install the dependencies needed for the experiment, such as RARE/freeRtr and Wireguard.

## Wireguard Server Config (VM2)
Generate the public and private keys for `wgs`, `r1` and `r2`.
```zsh
umask 077 && wg genkey > wgs-private-key && wg pubkey < wgs-private-key > wgs-public-key
umask 077 && wg genkey > r1-private-key && wg pubkey < r1-private-key > r1-public-key
umask 077 && wg genkey > r2-private-key && wg pubkey < r2-private-key > r2-public-key
```

Edit the `wg0.conf` file with the command `sudo nano /etc/wireguard/wg0.conf`:
```zsh
[Interface]
Address = 10.10.10.10/24
ListenPort = 51820
PrivateKey = <debian-vm1-private-key>

[Peer]
PublicKey = <freertr-vm1-public-key>
AllowedIPs = 10.10.10.1/32

[Peer]
PublicKey = <freertr-vm2-public-key>
AllowedIPs = 10.10.10.2/32
```

## Routers configuration (freeRtr)

### R1 HW and SW configs (VM1)
Hardware configuration file `sudo nano /rtr/rtr-hw.txt`:
```zsh
int eth1 eth 0000.1111.0001 127.0.0.1 10001 127.0.0.1 65535
tcp2vrf 1123 v1 23
proc eth0 sudo /rtr/pcapInt.bin eth0 65535 127.0.0.1 10001 127.0.0.1
```
Software configuration file `sudo nano /rtr/rtr-sw.txt`:
```zsh
hostname r1
!
crypto ipsec ips1
 description <r1-private-key><wireguard-server-public-key>
 key GExWuXQ9RV4E+xeK/sXjk+DvBPJEAVbS5Z0KaWh2fV0=8i7QSghwslgQ3LCHg5pnEtkVgyd1KooDJK5F3xKYJTc=
 exit
!
prefix-list all4
 sequence 10 permit 0.0.0.0/0 ge 0 le 0
 exit
!
prefix-list all6
 sequence 10 permit ::/0 ge 0 le 0
 exit
!
vrf def v1
 exit
!
int eth1
 no desc
 vrf for v1
 ipv4 address dynamic dynamic
 ipv4 gateway-prefix all4
 ipv4 dhcp-client enable
 ipv4 dhcp-client early
 no shutdown
 no log-link-change
 exit
!
interface tunnel1
 description r2@eth1 -> wgs-ip-eth1@51820
 tunnel key 51820
 tunnel vrf v1
 tunnel protection ips1
 tunnel source eth0
 tunnel destination <wgs-ip-eth1>
 tunnel mode wireguard
 vrf forwarding v1
 ipv4 address 10.10.10.1 /24
 no shutdown
 no log-link-change
 exit
!
server telnet tel
 security protocol telnet
 exec timeout 10000000
 exec logging
 no exec authorization
 no login authentication
 login logging
 vrf v1
 exit
!
end
```

### R2 HW and SW configs (VM3)
Hardware configuration file `sudo nano /rtr/rtr-hw.txt`:
```zsh
int eth1 eth 0000.2222.0001 127.0.0.1 20001 127.0.0.1 65535
tcp2vrf 2223 v1 23
proc eth0 sudo /rtr/pcapInt.bin eth0 65535 127.0.0.1 20001 127.0.0.1
```
Software configuration file `sudo nano /rtr/rtr-sw.txt`:
```zsh
hostname r2
!
crypto ipsec ips1
 description <r1-private-key><wgs-public-key>
 key GExWuXQ9RV4E+xeK/sXjk+DvBPJEAVbS5Z0KaWh2fV0=8i7QSghwslgQ3LCHg5pnEtkVgyd1KooDJK5F3xKYJTc=
 exit
!
prefix-list all4
 sequence 10 permit 0.0.0.0/0 ge 0 le 0
 exit
!
prefix-list all6
 sequence 10 permit ::/0 ge 0 le 0
 exit
!
vrf def v1
 exit
!
int eth1
 no desc
 vrf for v1
 ipv4 address dynamic dynamic
 ipv4 gateway-prefix all4
 ipv4 dhcp-client enable
 ipv4 dhcp-client early
 no shutdown
 no log-link-change
 exit
!
interface tunnel1
 description r2@eth1 -> wgs-ip-eth1@51820
 tunnel key 51820
 tunnel vrf v1
 tunnel protection ips1
 tunnel source eth1
 tunnel destination <wgs-ip-eth1>
 tunnel mode wireguard
 vrf forwarding v1
 ipv4 address 10.10.10.2 /24
 no shutdown
 no log-link-change
 exit
!
server telnet tel
 security protocol telnet
 exec timeout 10000000
 exec logging
 no exec authorization
 no login authentication
 login logging
 vrf v1
 exit
!
end
```

### Start RARE/freeRtr
Edit `start.sh` file with the command `sudo nano /home/vagrant/start.sh`:
```zsh
#!/bin/sh
# This script start the RARE/freeRtr router
java -jar /rtr/rtr.jar routersc /rtr/rtr-hw.txt /rtr/rtr-sw.txt
```
Make it executable:
```zsh
sudo chmod +x start.sh
```

## References
- [Vagrant Documentation](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs)
- [Wireguard Documentation](https://www.wireguard.com/)
- [RARE/freeRtr Documentation](http://docs.freertr.org/)
- [Wireguard and RARE/freeRtr integration example](https://wiki.geant.org/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=270630994)
